Okay.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon everyone.
So yesterday we started talking about finite automata, finite state
NOTE CONF
machines and drew some diagrams and introduce some diagrammatic notation,
and at some point introduced a few symbols.
NOTE CONF
I'm about to throw a lot more symbols at you,
because we're going to try to do something vaguely mathematical.
NOTE CONF
And in order to do maths, we need symbols.
Did anybody have questions from yesterday?
NOTE CONF
Things they would like explained again or differently?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So could everybody else please be quiet so I can
hear people speak here?
NOTE CONF
Um, so the question about ways to think about this.
What about how long is it?
NOTE CONF
Oh, how long can a sentence be in English?
You mean in the digression?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Would it be acceptable to say somebody?
NOTE CONF
Um, so that's a much more stringent definition that was
being suggested by some people yesterday.
NOTE CONF
Can a sentence last longer than anybody can pay attention
to it?
NOTE CONF
Um, I mean, there are no right or wrong answers,
are there?
NOTE CONF
This is a matter of opinion about what you think
a reasonable definition is.
NOTE CONF
Um, so the subtext behind all that stuff was really,
what's the difference between doing mathematics, where we just define
NOTE CONF
things to be whatever we want and doing something more
human, where we want things that are vaguely sensible.
NOTE CONF
You might say that the same applies to other things
in computing.
NOTE CONF
Um, any questions about the automata stuff?
Any notations that were unclear?
NOTE CONF
Good.
Um, so yesterday I think we finished off with this
NOTE CONF
little diagram.
Now I want to get symbolic because I want to
NOTE CONF
build that automaton from simpler automata.
And in order to do that, I have to be
NOTE CONF
able to define the operations I'm building on automata.
And that means, inevitably, notation.
NOTE CONF
So a lot of the notation I'm going to introduce
now is pretty standard throughout much of theoretical computer science
NOTE CONF
and indeed mathematics.
So if this is the first time you've seen it,
NOTE CONF
don't think of it as a complete waste.
It's not just for this course.
NOTE CONF
You will see these notations again.
And you need to develop a facility in reading notations
NOTE CONF
and understanding.
People should always define notations, but in practice they don't
NOTE CONF
because very common notations are often taken as understood.
Just as we don't define times and plus most of
NOTE CONF
the time.
Um, so suppose I've got a set sigma.
NOTE CONF
So if you remember from yesterday, I was using sigma
to be the name of the input alphabet, the labels
NOTE CONF
that the machine reads from the outside world.
So if I've got any set sigma, then when I
NOTE CONF
write Sigma star, I mean the set of strings where
the letters of the strings are that alphabet.
NOTE CONF
And by strings here I mean strings, as you know,
strings in Haskell.
NOTE CONF
Um, I suppose in Haskell they're technically lists.
In maths, we don't think of them as lists, but
NOTE CONF
a sequence of things in sigma is a string over
sigma.
NOTE CONF
This little star here is called the cleaning star.
You might remember that cleaner was the guy on my
NOTE CONF
title slide.
So this is one of many notations he introduced.
NOTE CONF
Um, I need often to talk about the empty string,
because it's the simplest string in Haskell.
NOTE CONF
You have multiple ways to write the empty string, but.
A pair of double quotes would do it.
NOTE CONF
Or even just the empty list, because in Haskell, strings
are lists.
NOTE CONF
Typically, in theoretical work we tend to use the letter
epsilon Greek epsilon for the empty string.
NOTE CONF
I don't think there's any more profound reason for this
than that.
NOTE CONF
Epsilon begins with E, and so does empty.
Um, an epsilon is used for little things a lot.
NOTE CONF
Um, what do we do with strings?
You've done a bunch of things with strings and indeed
NOTE CONF
lists in Haskell.
One of the things you've done with them is concatenate
NOTE CONF
two strings.
This is something, of course we do in text processing
NOTE CONF
all the time.
There are several ways of concatenating strings.
NOTE CONF
You might stick a letter on the beginning, or you
might put two strings together.
NOTE CONF
So if S is some string and I want to
add a letter to the beginning, then I just write
NOTE CONF
x s.
Um, I realise at this point that because we've also
NOTE CONF
been teaching you Haskell with the notation that Haskell avoids,
like this can get confusing.
NOTE CONF
This is maths.
So this is two separate variables x and s.
NOTE CONF
This is not x is as you would write in
Haskell.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So when I'm doing maths variables are single letters.
NOTE CONF
And unless they aren't and it will be obvious if
they aren't.
NOTE CONF
So if I write x s I mean the letter
s followed by the letters in the string s.
NOTE CONF
I could put s on the end as well.
These are strings.
NOTE CONF
They're not lists.
There's no cons.
NOTE CONF
I don't have to worry about colons and so on.
Then I want to talk about the transition function.
NOTE CONF
So yesterday I said that we could describe the arrows
in a finite automaton by a function.
NOTE CONF
And the function was called delta because transitions are changes
and delta means changes in calculus.
NOTE CONF
And the transition function takes the state you're at and
the letter you're seeing and tells you where to go
NOTE CONF
next.
It is often useful to talk about what happens when
NOTE CONF
you read several letters.
So this function tells you what to do when you've
NOTE CONF
read one letter.
We can define a function called Delta star, which tells
NOTE CONF
you where you end up after reading several letters.
So Delta Star takes the state you're currently in, takes
NOTE CONF
a string of input letters, and tells you what state
you'll end up in after reading the string of input
NOTE CONF
letters.
That's easily defined by recursion if you're all familiar with
NOTE CONF
recursion now.
How do we define it?
NOTE CONF
Well, if we're in a state and we read the
empty string, in other words, we haven't done anything at
NOTE CONF
all yet, then we stay where we are and this
is staying where we are not moving to where we
NOTE CONF
are.
If we're in a state and we read a letter
NOTE CONF
X, and then we have some more input to read,
then we just move to the state that X tells
NOTE CONF
us to move to.
So that's delta q x go from q two the
NOTE CONF
state that x takes us to.
And then we recursively apply the string transition function to
NOTE CONF
the remaining input.
So this should be nice and familiar to you.
NOTE CONF
You could implement this in Haskell very easily indeed.
You will implement it in Haskell very easily.
NOTE CONF
Some of you probably already have.
Um, but it's a piece of notation that we use
NOTE CONF
in order to argue about finite automata and ultimately do
proofs about them.
NOTE CONF
Um, any questions about these definitions so far?
Is there any notation in there that I haven't explained?
NOTE CONF
We're getting to another bit of the course where there's
a risk of me using a notation, because I know
NOTE CONF
it and have forgotten that you might not have seen
it.
NOTE CONF
So please shout whenever there's anything unexplained.
For example, I'm betting that I've used something in this
NOTE CONF
definition that you haven't seen before.
Probably haven't seen before.
NOTE CONF
Any unknown symbols to you there?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
This thing.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
so how many of you have seen that used before?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And for the rest of you, is it completely obvious
NOTE CONF
what it means?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Some.
No.
NOTE CONF
Um, well, I could be being perverse and using it
in a way that's different, but all I'm really doing
NOTE CONF
is being lazy.
I told you that mathematicians are lazy.
NOTE CONF
Um, laziness is one of the most desirable aspects in
a mathematician.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's a backwards membership sign, and all it means
is membership written the other way round.
NOTE CONF
So what I mean here is that I want to
talk about some s, and this s is a member
NOTE CONF
of Sigma Star.
Remember Sigma star is the set of strings.
NOTE CONF
Um, why am I using backwards membership?
Let me explain how to be lazy.
NOTE CONF
If I didn't do it, I would have to write.
So I have saved myself one s and one.
NOTE CONF
And that's clearly worth introducing a new symbol for, isn't
it?
NOTE CONF
Well, no, but you will see this kind of notation
thrown around, so I thought I'd put it in here.
NOTE CONF
So if s is a string of letters in the
input alphabet, the trace is what we see the automaton
NOTE CONF
doing when it reads the string.
So in particular we look at the set of states
NOTE CONF
and we see it goes from the initial state which
remember is q0.
NOTE CONF
Then it goes to some other state because it reads
a one and goes to q1, it reads A2 goes
NOTE CONF
to Q2 and so on.
And this sequence of states is the trace like the
NOTE CONF
execution execution trace of a program?
If any of you have yet found out how to
NOTE CONF
debug Haskell, you will be watching traces of function evaluation.
So trace is the word commonly used to describe the
NOTE CONF
way that a machine or a program or a function
behaves as it evolves step by step.
NOTE CONF
So everybody happy with the definition of trace.
This is the definition that we use in order to
NOTE CONF
do whatever it is we're trying to do with finite
automata.
NOTE CONF
What we're mostly using them for is to decide whether
a string is in a particular language.
NOTE CONF
And in order to do that, we need to talk
about the strings that the automaton accepts.
NOTE CONF
Remember, automata have final states or accepting states which are
good and any other state is bad.
NOTE CONF
And you read a string, you end up in a
good state or a bad state.
NOTE CONF
The language accepted by an automaton M, which we write
L of M, is the strings that take you to
NOTE CONF
a good state.
And again, remember this notation from yesterday.
NOTE CONF
F is the string of good states, final states accepting
states, whatever you want to call them.
NOTE CONF
So when is the language accepted exactly?
If the string transition function from the initial state reading
NOTE CONF
the string takes you into the set of final states.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Any questions on that definition.
So these definitions are core to the next two weeks.
NOTE CONF
I want to say a little bit more about laziness
on the side.
NOTE CONF
Um, it gets extremely boring right?
Right.
NOTE CONF
Boring.
Writing down at the start of every definition.
NOTE CONF
Let em be a machine with a set of states
Q and an input alphabet.
NOTE CONF
Sigma and a transition function.
Delta and initial state q nought and final states f.
NOTE CONF
So if I talk about em, you can assume that
it is q sigma delta q nought f.
NOTE CONF
And if I stick things on top of letters like
primes or hats or anything else, you can assume, unless
NOTE CONF
I say otherwise, that its set of states is going
to be Q dashed and its input alphabet is going
NOTE CONF
to be sigma dashed, and so on and so on
and so on.
NOTE CONF
Um, mathematicians use many ways of extending symbols, primes.
This is called double prime or double dashed.
NOTE CONF
Sometimes we use numbers.
We can use various fancy accents or complexes, whatever.
NOTE CONF
But if I decorate an Em with something, you can
generally assume that everything else in the machine gets decorated.
NOTE CONF
Unless I say it isn't.
So we'll see that fairly shortly when we start defining
NOTE CONF
some constructions on automata.
So final chance to ask any clarifications about notation and
NOTE CONF
definitions before I start using them.
Nope.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so why do I want to do this?
Languages accepted by machines are an interesting class of languages.
NOTE CONF
It turns out that they are particularly well structured and
we can combine them in nice ways.
NOTE CONF
So it's useful to have a convenient word to describe
the class of languages that is accepted by finite automata.
NOTE CONF
And we're going to use the term regular for this
if you come.
NOTE CONF
Anybody come up through the French education system?
No.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
So the French in general prefer to use rational rather
NOTE CONF
than regular for reasons that I've never quite understood.
And you may see both, but most in most English
NOTE CONF
speaking maths we talk about regular languages.
And for the moment we'll say that a language is
NOTE CONF
regular.
If we can build a finite automaton that accepts it,
NOTE CONF
in the sense that this definition of acceptance gives regular
languages a nice because they're easy to analyse, and we
NOTE CONF
can construct regular languages from other regular languages in the
way that we're about to do.
NOTE CONF
So if an automaton recognises a regular language, then if
we have two automaton two automata, we can think about
NOTE CONF
combining them in various ways and seeing if we can
construct more interesting languages.
NOTE CONF
So there are a bunch of ways things we might
do to a language.
NOTE CONF
One rather obvious thing we might do with a language
is say, actually, this is the language of bad things.
NOTE CONF
So sometimes it's easier to talk about which things are
bad than to talk about which things are good.
NOTE CONF
So maybe it's easy to define the bad strings.
And then can we build a machine that define describes
NOTE CONF
the good things instead?
This is complementing the automaton.
NOTE CONF
If we can build a machine that accepts a particular
language L, how do we build a machine that accepts
NOTE CONF
the complement of L.
Um, and I know from previous years that not everybody
NOTE CONF
has seen all of these definitions.
If you want to talk about the difference of two
NOTE CONF
sets, that is the thing.
That is things that are in A but are not
NOTE CONF
in B, there are a couple of common notations you've
used.
NOTE CONF
Just out of idle curiosity, who is already used to
seeing minus for that?
NOTE CONF
Very few who is already used to seeing backslash for
that?
NOTE CONF
Slightly more.
I'm sure the rest of you have seen notations for
NOTE CONF
set difference.
Is there another notation?
NOTE CONF
There probably are.
You will see both.
NOTE CONF
I tend to prefer minus because backslash is just an
ugly symbol.
NOTE CONF
And besides it's used a lot in programming for various
things.
NOTE CONF
Um, so by a minus B I mean things that
are in A and not in B.
NOTE CONF
So if I have an automaton to accept a language,
how do I build an automaton that accepts the complement
NOTE CONF
language?
It's not very hard.
NOTE CONF
Without looking at the rest of the slide, can you
see how to do it?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
The complement.
NOTE CONF
Of.
Complement of L so I.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Sigma.
NOTE CONF
Um, I can't do anything to Sigma because the input
alphabet is the same.
NOTE CONF
I have to change something in the machine.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
I just want to be accepted and not accepted.
Swap the accepting and non accepting states.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So how does the complement work.
A string is in the complement if it is not
NOTE CONF
in the original language.
So when it's a string accepted by an automaton when
NOTE CONF
it hits a good state.
When is it rejected.
NOTE CONF
When it hits a bad state.
So if I swap the good states and the bad
NOTE CONF
states, I accept the compliment language.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so here I have a demonstration of abusive notation
again.
NOTE CONF
So here is a machine with the standard letters q,
sigma, delta, q nought f nought.
NOTE CONF
If I want to accept the complement of the language,
then all I have to do is make good states
NOTE CONF
bad and bad states good, which I can do by
saying that the good states of this m bar are
NOTE CONF
the bad states of the original automaton Q minus F
good states.
NOTE CONF
All states are bad states.
Um, there is a catch here.
NOTE CONF
So I told you yesterday when I introduced the black
hole convention that you need to remember that it's there.
NOTE CONF
The black hole convention said that we often don't draw
states where it's obvious what happens.
NOTE CONF
But of course, if I take an automaton with a
black hole state and I complement it, then the black
NOTE CONF
hole state becomes an accepting state.
So it appears in the automaton and has to be
NOTE CONF
drawn as such.
So while space saving conventions are a good thing, you
NOTE CONF
have to remember where they've been used and undo them
if necessary.
NOTE CONF
So does this make sense?
Anybody not see what I'm doing here?
NOTE CONF
What if you were doing this in Haskell?
What would the bar represent?
NOTE CONF
Not.
I mean, it means complement.
NOTE CONF
So.
But if you're implementing this in Haskell, as you will,
NOTE CONF
what type of thing would bar be?
So what I'm doing here is asking you to think
NOTE CONF
about mathematical notation in a more programming like way.
So mathematicians just write m bar.
NOTE CONF
But if I were programming this stuff up, what would
I be doing?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So if I were programming this, I'd be applying a
NOTE CONF
function called Complement my automaton or something.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
So, um, if you prefer to think about programming than
maths, you can go quite a long way by translating
NOTE CONF
mathematician style notation into functions.
So the bar here, you can think of as an
NOTE CONF
operator that is taking an automaton M and giving you
back another automaton that is the complement of it.
NOTE CONF
And this definition of m bar on the right is
what you would you would write as the right hand
NOTE CONF
side of your function definition in Haskell.
So what have I just done?
NOTE CONF
I've taken on automaton and built another automaton that returns
the compliment language.
NOTE CONF
This tells me something.
And here I'm going to introduce some more terminology, which
NOTE CONF
is probably new to you.
This tells me something quite important.
NOTE CONF
It tells me that the set of regular languages is
closed under complement.
NOTE CONF
Have you any idea what closed under means?
Some do.
NOTE CONF
Some have seen it before.
Who's never seen this before?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That leaves a very large number of you where I'm
NOTE CONF
very surprised if you've seen it before, because it doesn't
usually pop up until university maths.
NOTE CONF
Um, I don't think it comes in linear algebra.
What do I mean when I say that the set
NOTE CONF
of regular languages is closed under complement?
Well, all I mean is that if I take a
NOTE CONF
regular language and compliment it, then it is still regular.
So this term closed under is used a lot in
NOTE CONF
building mathematical things.
It means I have a big set of nice things,
NOTE CONF
and I do something to it, which takes me back
into the set of nice things.
NOTE CONF
So in this case, my nice things.
Are regular languages, and if I take a language and
NOTE CONF
compliment it, then I still get a regular language.
Why do I get a regular language?
NOTE CONF
Because I've been able to build an automaton that accepts
it.
NOTE CONF
So that's good because complimenting languages is something one does
all the time.
NOTE CONF
But we can't go very far just by taking languages
and complimenting them and complimenting them back again, because the
NOTE CONF
complement of the complement is the original.
And actually, if you look at this construction, this construction
NOTE CONF
also has the property that if you do it twice,
you get back to where you started, which is not
NOTE CONF
always the case with complementing constructions.
What else can we do?
NOTE CONF
So yesterday we talked about an automaton that recognised a
moderately complicated set of languages.
NOTE CONF
That was the set of strings of zeros and ones
where there were an even number of ones and an
NOTE CONF
odd number of zeros.
Or was it the other way round?
NOTE CONF
Um, and I asked, do you think whether there was
a way of structuring that in some way?
NOTE CONF
Well, there are a couple of ways.
We'll see one now and another next week.
NOTE CONF
But I want to introduce now another construction on automata.
This is maybe not so Obviously not so immediately.
NOTE CONF
Obviously an interesting thing to do if I've got two
languages and I'm going to call them L and L
NOTE CONF
Prime, and they're regular languages, meaning I can construct them,
I can build them, build automata to recognise them.
NOTE CONF
Can I build a language that accepts the intersection of
the two languages?
NOTE CONF
So the intersection of the languages, that means a string
that is in both languages.
NOTE CONF
Why do we want to do this?
Well, actually in practice we don't want to do it
NOTE CONF
very often.
In everyday programming with regular languages, you don't often use
NOTE CONF
the intersection operator.
And there's also a good practical reason, which we will
NOTE CONF
see maybe next week why we don't do that.
But if you can think of a reason, a situation
NOTE CONF
where you might want it, you have two good properties
of languages.
NOTE CONF
You need your languages to satisfy this property to be
good, and you also want them to satisfy this property
NOTE CONF
to be good.
You would like a single thing to check both properties
NOTE CONF
simultaneously, and that gives you the intersection of the two
languages.
NOTE CONF
It's a little bit harder to see how to take
two automata for two different languages, and plug them together
NOTE CONF
to accept something that is in the intersection, but not
very hard.
NOTE CONF
Um, how are we doing for time, 20 minutes and
two slides?
NOTE CONF
Maybe I should let you think about it a bit.
Can you think about.
NOTE CONF
How you might connect two automata together so that a
string has to pass through both of them, and be
NOTE CONF
good in both of them in order to be counted
as a good string.
NOTE CONF
Any ideas coming up?
If I give you a string, and I ask you
NOTE CONF
to tell me whether it's accepted by this one, and
also by this one.
NOTE CONF
There are several things you could do.
What's one one easy thing you could do?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So I could say run it through this one.
NOTE CONF
If it fails there, then it fails.
Otherwise, run it through this one.
NOTE CONF
If it comes out the other end with good, then
it's passed through both.
NOTE CONF
Um, that's one way.
It's slightly unpretty, but it works.
NOTE CONF
Wouldn't it be nice if we could kind of run
the two machines together, rather than one after the other?
NOTE CONF
So what we're going to do is find a way
to take a string and feed it effectively to both
NOTE CONF
automata at the same time, and that's not actually Very
hard.
NOTE CONF
We just have to define a rather large automaton that
codes up the states of both automata at once.
NOTE CONF
So I'll give you the formalism first, and then I'll
give you the picture.
NOTE CONF
So what we have here is automaton one m which
is q sigma blah blah, and automaton M dashed which
NOTE CONF
has dashes.
However, these two automata have the same input alphabet, so
NOTE CONF
they both have input alphabet sigma because they're looking at
the same set of input strings.
NOTE CONF
Here's a definition.
This is a definition of what the product of two
NOTE CONF
automata, or to be precise, it's the definition of the
product of two deterministic finite automata.
NOTE CONF
Remember I said yesterday we were dealing with deterministic machines
Dfas.
NOTE CONF
We'll get a little more complex next week.
What is the product of two automata?
NOTE CONF
Automata?
Well, the set of states is the product of the
NOTE CONF
set of states.
So q cross, q prime.
NOTE CONF
Now I think actually after my tutorial yesterday, are you
all by now familiar with the use of times to
NOTE CONF
represent the Cartesian product of two sets?
Who is not?
NOTE CONF
So some people are definitely a bit dodgy.
Who is sure that they're unsure?
NOTE CONF
Right.
So we have some notation that needs explaining.
NOTE CONF
Um, this stuff is in the basic set theory that
we ask you to read before starting the course, I'm
NOTE CONF
pretty sure, but it doesn't hurt to refine it.
So if I've got a set.
NOTE CONF
A and A set B the Cartesian product.
So that's Cartesian after Descartes is simply the set of
NOTE CONF
pairs.
The set of pairs of things.
NOTE CONF
First element from the first set and second element from
the second set.
NOTE CONF
So in other words, you're just looking at one element
in each set and that is your new state.
NOTE CONF
So here what I'm saying is that the state of
the product automaton is a state in this one, together
NOTE CONF
with a state in this one.
You'll see that diagrammatically shortly.
NOTE CONF
The input alphabet is the same because we're trying to
recognise the language.
NOTE CONF
Then there's going to be a transition function, which I
have to define on the next line.
NOTE CONF
What's the initial state of a product?
Well, if I'm taking two automata and I want to
NOTE CONF
run them together, the initial state should be the initial
state of the two halves.
NOTE CONF
I start at the beginning.
What are the accepting states?
NOTE CONF
What are the good states?
Well, my aim here is to accept the language that
NOTE CONF
is the intersection of the strings.
So I want good states to be ones that are
NOTE CONF
good in both halves of the construction.
So an accepting state is a good state in M
NOTE CONF
and a good state in M dashed.
What does the transition function do?
NOTE CONF
Well, the transition function is supposed to take a state
in one and a state in the other, and tell
NOTE CONF
you where to go when you read an input.
That's straightforward, right?
NOTE CONF
Because if I read an input a here in this
automaton, I see where I go with an A in
NOTE CONF
this automaton, I see where I go with an A,
and that's where I end up.
NOTE CONF
So that's what this says.
If I'm in state Q in the left and Q
NOTE CONF
dash in the right, and I read an A, then
I run the left hand one to get to the
NOTE CONF
new state there, and I run the right hand one
to get to the new state there.
NOTE CONF
So what does this look like pictorially?
Here is a product automaton.
NOTE CONF
So this is the thing we saw yesterday.
These are two simpler automata.
NOTE CONF
If you look at this thing on the left, what
does it do?
NOTE CONF
The thing in red.
This is an automaton that reads zeros and flips back
NOTE CONF
and forward between zeros even and zeros.
aud and it does nothing at all.
NOTE CONF
It reads the ones, but just stays where it is.
So this is an automaton that just counts the zeros
NOTE CONF
in the input string.
And it's good when there's an even number of zeros.
NOTE CONF
The blue thing here is another very simple automaton.
It counts the ones in the input strings, so it
NOTE CONF
flips back and forward between an even number of ones
and an odd number of ones.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't care about the zeros.
And this is good when the number of ones is
NOTE CONF
odd.
So if we have a string that is satisfied by
NOTE CONF
both of these things, we have a string which has
an even number of zeros and an even number of
NOTE CONF
odds, which is the thing we tried to build yesterday
from scratch.
NOTE CONF
But if you look at what goes on here and
you construct the automaton, so let's do it bit by
NOTE CONF
bit for two states here.
There are two states here.
NOTE CONF
So they are going to be two times two for
states over here.
NOTE CONF
What are the states.
They are simply the pairs of the states in the
NOTE CONF
two halves.
So E0 and e1 gives us a state here E0
NOTE CONF
and O1 gives us a state there 0010001.
So we now have states on the right hand side
NOTE CONF
which are combinations of states on the left of the
halves here.
NOTE CONF
If you then look at the transition function it does
the obvious thing.
NOTE CONF
So here the transition function for one on the e
on the zero half, it takes us from even to
NOTE CONF
even.
And on the one half it takes us from even
NOTE CONF
to odd.
And this is what that definition does for those two
NOTE CONF
constructions.
If you think about how this thing runs, the product
NOTE CONF
automaton is essentially running these two machines in parallel.
So the initial state of the two machines, if you
NOTE CONF
had them running separately, just feeding them the same input
would be like this.
NOTE CONF
This gives you the initial state of the product.
I read some input, read the zero say in the
NOTE CONF
left hand in the broken down automata.
Then I see this one move and I see this
NOTE CONF
one go back to where it is.
And that corresponds to the movement here in the product
NOTE CONF
automaton.
And everything keeps working like that.
NOTE CONF
So how far am I going to do this?
It gets a bit boring, doesn't it?
NOTE CONF
Um.
This was quite a nice construction.
NOTE CONF
Um, there were a couple of ways one could think
about doing it.
NOTE CONF
So before I talk about the on the fly stuff,
do you see what I'm doing there?
NOTE CONF
When I just connect the automaton together, run them in
parallel, feeding the input both at the same time?
NOTE CONF
That's a fairly intuitive construction.
You should ask yourself about black hole states.
NOTE CONF
Um, one thing that you might wonder is, do I
need to build the whole thing?
NOTE CONF
So this thing is a mathematical definition.
It defines an entire product or automaton with every conceivable
NOTE CONF
state in it.
Every possible combination of states in the two halves.
NOTE CONF
And sometimes it might be more efficient to start at
the beginning state and just build the states up as
NOTE CONF
you need them.
So if I were building this in an incremental way,
NOTE CONF
then I would start here and say, well, look, I've
got E and E0, so I've got E0 and E1,
NOTE CONF
I do a transition, something happens.
Now I find myself in a state which must be
NOTE CONF
called zero, zero and E1.
So I know that's in the automaton.
NOTE CONF
And as I run through I will add states to
my construction.
NOTE CONF
The reason this is sometimes useful is because sometimes automata
have a lot of states that are never actually reached.
NOTE CONF
And it if your product automaton has the property that
most of the states are never reached, it can save
NOTE CONF
a lot of space because.
Quick question.
NOTE CONF
If M and M have size n, what's the size
of the product automaton.
NOTE CONF
N squared n times n because Cartesian product has n
times n possible pairs of states, and generally that's bad.
NOTE CONF
So if we can, we want to try to avoid
making automata big.
NOTE CONF
This is actually why we don't tend to use the
intersection operator very much in practice, because intersecting automaton makes
NOTE CONF
them bigger.
Also, often it's not clear why we want to do
NOTE CONF
it.
It's relatively rare to have an application where you say,
NOTE CONF
I want a string to be in two languages, but
it does happen.
NOTE CONF
Um.
We've talked now about building Strings that are accepted by
NOTE CONF
both automata at the same time.
What's the other obvious thing we could ask about?
NOTE CONF
Two automata or two languages.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Say again.
So I can't quite hear.
NOTE CONF
You say you need to shout louder for me to
hear them.
NOTE CONF
Um.
In this university, a PhD thesis can be written in
NOTE CONF
either English or Gaelic.
So possibly I might want to consider strings that are
NOTE CONF
in the union of two languages.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So another thing we might ask is given an input,
is it in one language or the other?
NOTE CONF
Now this is something that is actually used much more
in practice.
NOTE CONF
Because if you think about trying to describe a programming
language, programming languages have lots of constructions in them.
NOTE CONF
Each one gives you a valid construction.
So a function definition, a list, a function application or
NOTE CONF
whatever, and a string of characters is a good part
of the programming language.
NOTE CONF
If it's a good function definition or a function application
or expression or whatever your language has.
NOTE CONF
So building up regular expressions by taking the union of
things is something that we do all the time.
NOTE CONF
Um, I've just accidentally used the term regular expression, which
I was trying not to use yet.
NOTE CONF
How many people already use regular expressions?
Okay, so the rest of you.
NOTE CONF
Next week we will talk about regular expressions here, but
then go away and find out about them because they
NOTE CONF
are incredibly useful.
If you have a decent search facility that allows you
NOTE CONF
to specify regular expressions, and if you do things like
searching for email, matching a particular property, then looking for
NOTE CONF
things that are the union of two things is something
I do a lot.
NOTE CONF
For example, I need to search my mail frequently to
find something I might have forgotten, and I can remember
NOTE CONF
that it may have been from one of three people
because they were the people involved.
NOTE CONF
So I want to search my mail for mail that
is from Joe Bloggs.
NOTE CONF
Don John Doe or Ann Ferguson say So because I
use a civilised mail client, I can do things like
NOTE CONF
that.
I can use regular languages to describe the male that
NOTE CONF
I want to search.
And I can say, show me all the males from
NOTE CONF
this person or this person or this person.
And because regular regular languages allow you a lot of
NOTE CONF
slop, I can do more sophisticated things.
Even if I can't remember their names.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't matter as long as I can remember part
of their names.
NOTE CONF
Um, so if you are doing things on any reasonable
information system, it should provide you with a way of
NOTE CONF
doing wildcard searches.
If I say wildcard search, does that mean something to
NOTE CONF
more people?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So that's also implemented by means of regular languages.
So this is one of the basic things looking for
NOTE CONF
the union of two languages.
And the curious thing is that the construction is almost
NOTE CONF
identical, which is a bit odd because we would expect
some kind of sum to be rather different from some
NOTE CONF
kind of product.
But in this case of deterministic automata, I'm going to
NOTE CONF
define this slightly complicated looking beast.
So m and m prime are as before.
NOTE CONF
They are two automata.
And I'm going to define a sum m plus deterministic
NOTE CONF
of m prime almost exactly the same as before.
So I'm running the two automata in parallel.
NOTE CONF
This is the same.
The only difference is that I'm just changing the accepting
NOTE CONF
states.
So when I build the product automaton, I said the
NOTE CONF
accepting states are the ones that are good in both
automata.
NOTE CONF
And now I'm simply saying that the accepting states are
the ones that are good in either automaton.
NOTE CONF
So what does this say?
This says.
NOTE CONF
A state is good if it's any old state on
the left and a good state on the right, or
NOTE CONF
alternatively, it's a good state on the left and any
old state on the right.
NOTE CONF
So this is exactly the same construction as before, just
with a different set of accepting states.
NOTE CONF
And that means that a string is accepted by this
construct.
NOTE CONF
Exactly.
If it's accepted by either one or the other of
NOTE CONF
the two halves, or both, of course.
Um.
NOTE CONF
I should at this point see how many people will
get something out of this.
NOTE CONF
Um, I wrote here all the states on the left
times, the good states on the right, all the good
NOTE CONF
states on the left, times the good state.
Such times, all the states on the right.
NOTE CONF
Another way of writing that is to say take all
the good, good states on the left.
NOTE CONF
So I take all the good, all, take all the
states in both automata, and subtract off the states that
NOTE CONF
are bad in both of them.
Now, which states are bad in both halves of the
NOTE CONF
construction?
The state is bad in both halves.
NOTE CONF
If it's in the bad states in the left half,
and the bad states in the right half.
NOTE CONF
Now, if I take this slightly awkward notation and use
both complement as I have been using, I could write
NOTE CONF
that as the bar of f bar times f bar
f prime bar.
NOTE CONF
Um, does that remind you of anything at all?
I think I heard somebody say something.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So I definitely heard somebody say something in that time.
NOTE CONF
Um, I remember the, the not of the and is
the or of the knots and so on.
NOTE CONF
So we've got a relationship here of negation between some
and product.
NOTE CONF
The sum of two automata has a set of final
states, which is the complement of the product of the
NOTE CONF
complement of the states.
So that's not a coincidence because union intersection are or
NOTE CONF
an and and so there's some Demogorgon like stuff going
on here or in the the word that I use
NOTE CONF
a lot.
Duality.
NOTE CONF
So what have I done in the course of the
last half hour?
NOTE CONF
We've built up automata from smaller automata.
And this has told us that if I take regular,
NOTE CONF
regular languages and do things to them, they stay regular.
For some things that I can do, I can take
NOTE CONF
a language, I can complement it, and it's still a
regular language.
NOTE CONF
I can take two regular language, two regular languages intersect
them, and that's a regular language, because I can build
NOTE CONF
an automaton that accepts it, and I can take two
languages and take their union.
NOTE CONF
And that's still a regular language, because I can build
this automaton that accepts it.
NOTE CONF
That's quite a useful and powerful set of things to
be able to do to a language, because it's the
NOTE CONF
logical operations.
It's not.
NOTE CONF
And an or so that means I can manipulate languages
with logical operators and be confident that I can build
NOTE CONF
automata to recognise them if I want to, which is
how such search facilities in civilised databases and the like
NOTE CONF
work.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Again.
Think about what you should do with the black hole
NOTE CONF
states.
So next week we will go on and generalise this
NOTE CONF
a bit further.
I've been talking about deterministic automata, so I should tell
NOTE CONF
you what nondeterministic automata are.
They are a very weird thing.
NOTE CONF
So I'll spend some time next week talking about the
weirdness of them.
NOTE CONF
But they're also a very useful thing.
They're one of those things that we can invent as
NOTE CONF
mathematicians, even though they have no physical reality.
And they make using these regular languages much, much easier,
NOTE CONF
as you will see.
So please, before next week, go over this stuff and
NOTE CONF
come back on Thursday with any questions you have, because
we need to get the questions sorted out before going
NOTE CONF
on and finishing what is actually the final compulsory topic
of the course?
NOTE CONF
There are some non compulsory stuff in week 11 for
anybody who want it.
NOTE CONF
Okay so it's 3:00 now it's one minute past.
Beg your pardon.
NOTE CONF